---
layout: "post"
title: "Should You Buy a Gaming Laptop?"
---

I have had many different types of laptop, from dual core low spec to higher end gaming laptop with capable GPU. Different types of laptop offers different types of performance and experience. I did not know about it back then as I was only thinking that laptop is just a box capable of running Microsoft Word and few tabs of Google Chrome. It all changes when I got my first gaming laptop which makes everything feels thousand time smoother and lighter. I figured I want to endorse this laptop category, just in case someone is looking to get it. 

Let me tell you about my previous laptops. My first laptop was a Toshiba with dual core Intel CPU and 2 GB of RAM. It can run Windows 7 quite well and I had several games there. Then my mom bought me another Toshibe laptop, but this time with Intel Celeron and 4 GB of RAM running Windows 8. This laptop was quite something as somehow I could run an entire FIFA 14 on medium setting, pretty wild. I had this laptop from 2015 up until 2019 when I decided to buy a new one because the hinge on it was broken. So, I bought a Lenovo with AMD A9 and 8GB RAM running Windows 10. When I first got this laptop, it was running very smooth and I could just breeze through every task during my final highschool year. The keyboard was also phenomenal. However, everything became dozen time heavier when I got to uni and had to install NetBeans, JetBrains, and all sorts of developer stuff. I still remember my old Lenovo struggling to open up Android Studio. That's when I decided to buy a new gaming laptop. 

I bought an HP Omen with AMD Ryzen 7 4800H and Nvidia RTX 2060 with 16 GB of RAM. Now, this laptop was a beast. I spent tons of time during Covid doing all sorts of programming and gaming with this beast. I can open up tens of Chrome tabs without struggling. I can open Word, Discord, Zoom, Chrome, and FIFA 22 simultaneously without having to break any sweat, do you know how mental that is? This laptop was the first time experienced high-end computing. No lags, no struggle, no need to adjust performance every single time, everything just works, I can move to different apps very quickly. I literally had zero problems when using this guy.

When you consider the speficication that I had with my Omen, notice that it has pretty high performant CPU and plenty RAM. This two components, I would say is the key if you want to have a very good experience and performance on a laptop. Unfortunately, not every type of laptops will have access to this luxury. Often, higher end CPUs are only offered for gaming laptop. Sometimes due to its requirement on cooling and power, sometimes just to separate the market. Most of the time, you will only get this type of CPU in a gaming laptop. On the rarest occasion, some brand would plug one of the high-end CPUs into a slimer laptop, but there will be drawbacks such as power limitation and some other things. The point is, you need a high-end CPU if you want to have high performance laptop, and they are often found in gaming laptops. 

Now lets talk about the GPU. I had RTX 2060, which is a beast in itself. Back when I was an undergrad, I use it mostly for gaming. I only knew that GPU equal gaming. I was right though, I can breeze through any game with ease. However, because I spent so much time using lower-end laptop, I often change my settings to medium or low, not wanting to push through the highest graphic settings just because I do not want to torture my laptop. That's pretty weird if I think about it now. My understanding that GPUs are only good for gaming soon gone during my master program. I had discovered a thing or two about deep learning and it involves something called CUDA. Turns out I can even use my RTX GPU for fine-tuning deep learning models. Everything changes again. Now, suddenly I mainly use my laptop to fine-tune smaller deep learning models and inference some Transformer models. I did not know that I would need a GPU and a very powerful computer until then. 

> The point is, having gaming laptop allows me to try many different things and actually be fine with it. No struggle. Everything just runs smoothly. 

Now that I have shared the amazing things about gaming laptops, time to tell you the dark truth. First and foremost, gaming laptops are extremely heavy. Mine could reach more than 3 kg including the power brick. Its a pain when you had to travel alot, and I do travel quite alot. However, if you can bare the weight, I am telling you that its worth it. Second, gaming laptops have tons of fans for cooling. You know what comes with fans? noise. Gaming laptops are very noisy sometimes, especially when you need to use the GPU. My lecturer said that it sounded like a plane once. Third, gaming laptops can be extremely hot. Yea, just think about it, you have a very powerful chip, of course it generates alot of heat. But its perfect if you have AC, especially if your laptops are made with some sort of metal, not the plastic ones. Fourth, gaming laptops are not ideal to be used unplugged. They drain your battery pretty fast. Not ideal if you want to work from a cafe without a charger. Fifth, and this is the most surreal one. Gaming laptops require crazy amount of electricity. Mine required 200 watts of electricity lol. I plugged my charger in a hotel room once and the entire room electricity just shuts down lol. Even at my home, I had to use those special electricity device that can control the voltage. These drawbacks are pretty huge and you need to consider them when you want to get a gaming laptop. 

Now, I would recommend a gaming laptop if you are undergrad student in computer science who games a lot, a casual gamer, graphic designer, video editor, or developer who deals with smaller deep learning model with one huge criteria: you do not travel a lot. If you mostly just use your laptop at home or at your lab, its completely fine. I would not recommend a gaming laptop if you travel a lot, loves co-working or working from cafe, only do office stuff and casual browsing, or just enjoying media via laptop.

Having a gaming laptop was such a big accomplishment and blessing for me. I can experience some higher performance computing and very smooth interaction with my laptop overall. I also love playing video games and its a good investment cause I dont have to buy console. I can do a lot of stuff with just my gaming laptop. I really loved it. 

Before buying a gaming laptop, please consider all the things I mentioned above. Watch some review videos. If you already have one, congratulations and enjoy it, mate! Its worth it!

Cheers,
Halim